Adding non-integrated(platform: none) nodes to a VMware integrated cluster (#1772)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/baremetal/add-bare-metal-host-to-vsphere.md

---
title: add-bare-metal-host-to-vsphere
authors:
  - "rvanderp3"
reviewers: 
  - "gnufied"
  - "JoelSpeed"
approvers: 
  - "JoelSpeed"
api-approvers: 
  - None
creation-date: 2025-02-10

> last-updated: 2025-02-10

Author: last-updated: 2026-06-24

Reviewer: good catch.  My IDE minimizes this section for some silly reason.

2. We did attempt to fix the [vSphere CSI Driver Daemonset](https://github.com/openshift/vmware-vsphere-csi-driver-operator/pull/305) to not deploy to BM node, but we decided to make storage generally not supported in hybrid environment

### API Extensions

### Topology Considerations

#### Hypershift / Hosted Control Planes

Does not have an impact.

#### Standalone Clusters

#### Single-node Deployments or MicroShift

Does not have an impact.

#### OpenShift Kubernetes Engine

Does not have an impact.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

#### Feature Gate Definition

The mixed-node environment behavior is gated behind the `VSphereMixedNodeEnv` feature gate, defined in the OpenShift API. The feature gate allows the new behavior to be introduced incrementally without affecting existing clusters. It is initially available in the `DevPreviewNoUpgrade` feature set and applies to both Hypershift and SelfManagedHA cluster profiles.

#### Cluster Storage Operator

The Cluster Storage Operator will not support hybrid environment.  It will need to be disabled in order for the operator to not go degraded.

> ##### Upstream CCM: Node Identity Labeling

Author: maybe add a reference to where this merged

Reviewer: I'll update this section to be a little clearer and contain a few links.  One for the general project and one to the PR when we discuss what is added.

spec:
  providerID: vsphere://42100fe1-0a04-9eb7-1b73-9a3d4578b557
```

##### check_nodes.go

The vSphere controller has a module that checks each node object to make sure it passes all environment / config checks.  As part of the checks, it validates if each node has a virtual machine (VM) found in vSphere.  In the case of the non vsphere bare metal node, the node will not have a VM in vSphere associated with it.  We need to update the check logic to verify that the node is in fact a vSphere node before checking for the VM.

The current plans are to check each node to see if the spec's providerID has been set and the label for provider-type is set.  If both of these are not set, then the node is expected to be ignored by the operator.

When the `VSphereMixedNodeEnv` feature gate is enabled, the node-check logic uses the `node.openshift.io/platform-type=vsphere` label as its gating signal. A node that does not carry this label is treated as a non-vSphere node and skipped entirely — no VM lookup is attempted and no error is raised. This prevents the operator from going degraded simply because a bare metal node has no corresponding VM in vCenter.

### Risks and Mitigations

> **!!! TODO !!!**

Author: remove or resolve todo's

Reviewer: Removed

---
title: add-bare-metal-host-to-vsphere
authors:
  - "rvanderp3"
reviewers: 
  - "gnufied"
  - "JoelSpeed"
approvers: 
  - "JoelSpeed"
api-approvers: 
  - None
creation-date: 2025-02-10
last-updated: 2025-02-10
tracking-link: 
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPSTRAT-1917
see-also:
  - None
replaces:
  - None
superseded-by:
  - None
---

# Bare Metal Hosts on vSphere Integrated Cluster

## Summary

As customers begin to use alternate virtualization or deployment patterns in their cluster they may need the ability to provision bare metal hosts along side their cloud integrated nodes. This is needed if a customer is unable to readily migrate their workloads to another OpenShift cluster or if they have a specific need to schedule workloads to both integrated and non-integrated nodes.

## Motivation

### User Stories

As a maintainer of an OpenShift cluster I need the ability to add bare metal hosts to my integrated OpenShift installation so I can migrate workloads to bare metal hosts without having to reinstall the cluster.

> 

Reviewer 2: As discussed, unless otherwise workloads are modified or BM nodes have special taints, nothing will prevent scheduling of pods that require storage to BM nodes even though they have no CSI driver installed. And that will cause those workloads to get stuck. We need to keep that in mind.

Author: @vr4manta I believe we addressed these concerns since the time this was raised.  can you confirm with @gnufied ?

Reviewer: Originally I had a PR to handle scheduling the DaemonSet pods using the new `platform-type=vsphere` label, but those changes were rejected in favor of having storage not supported.  So IMO we have this addressed.

3. Obtain or create a worker.ign file. This will be used to bootstrap the bare metal node.
4. Boot the new bare metal host from the RHCOS Live CD.
5. Install RHCOS:
```bash=
coreos-installer install /dev/sdX --insecure-ignition --ignition-url=https://path-to-compute-ignition --platform=metal
```
6. Reboot the node.
7. Approve CSRs for the node

Note: The [vSphere CSI driver daemonset](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/vsphere-csi-driver/blob/4479e2418f38cb93b5da4df7e043aff71a20cccc/manifests/vanilla/vsphere-csi-driver.yaml#L565-L569) tolerates all taints. I was able to disable it by making the operator unmanaged and removing the tolerations.

### API Extensions

### Topology Considerations

#### Hypershift / Hosted Control Planes

Does not have an impact.

#### Standalone Clusters

#### Single-node Deployments or MicroShift

Does not have an impact.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

#### VMware CSI Driver Operator

The VMware CSI Driver operator is being enhanced in the following ways:
1. Modify vmware-vsphere-csi-driver-node daemonset to only get deployed onto vsphere linux nodes
2. Enhance `checkOnNode` to ignore nodes that are not flagged as being a vSphere node.

> 

Reviewer 3: [vsphere problem detector](https://github.com/openshift/vsphere-problem-detector/blob/main/pkg/operator/operator.go) was sensitive to other intel nodes as it could not get the UUID on the call back. You may want to consider a section on this.

Author: @vr4manta have we run in to this?

Reviewer: I have not run across this yet.  This would be a good thing to look into to see if there are any logs messages we are not in favor of.  Some pods like VPD will log that it cannot find the BM node in vSphere, but I believe we have those as warnings.  This should be fine since it does not exist there.  We do have a new platform-type label that can be used to help identify vsphere specific nodes (which we are using in some places) for such validations.  There may be a small amount of time where several labels are not applied yet when a component sees the new node so even in these cases, there may be a small amount of log messages about not seeing the labels or node in vCenter.

    kubernetes.io/hostname: ngirard-multi-twxnm-bm
    kubernetes.io/os: linux
    node-role.kubernetes.io/worker: ""
    node.openshift.io/os_id: rhel
  name: ngirard-multi-twxnm-bm
  resourceVersion: "1704483"
  uid: d2bfe0f4-d579-45bb-95ea-84d46bb3c152
spec: {}
```

For more information on how some of these labels are set:

vSphere cloud provider logic for generating node data:
https://github.com/kubernetes/cloud-provider-vsphere/blob/76e06fac88a1dca2e027362bf23e196956bbf125/pkg/cloudprovider/vsphere/nodemanager.go#L373

CCM for setting node info such as instance-type:
https://github.com/kubernetes/cloud-provider/blob/4fde1de51fc1c709a6a53e2bfb065ee2d03d1560/controllers/node/node_controller.go#L511

##### check_nodes.go

The vSphere controller has a module that checks each node object to make sure it passes all environment / config checks.  As part of the checks, it validates if each node has a virtual machine (VM) found in vSphere.  In the case of the non vsphere bare metal node, the node will not have a VM in vSphere associated with it.  We need to update the check logic to verify that the node is in fact a vSphere node before checking for the VM.

> The current plans are to check each node to see if the spec's providerID has been set and the label for provider-type is set.  If both of these are not set, then the node is expected to be ignored by the operator. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The current plans are to check each node to see if the spec's providerID has been set and the label for `node.openshift.io/platform-type` is set.  If both of these are not set, then the node is expected to be ignored by the operator. 
```

Reviewer 4: This in code is now `node.openshift.io/platform-type=vsphere`
